Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dis Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes
and today I'm by Doctor Katherine Nave. She's a
level who trust early career research fellow at the
University of Edinburgh. And today we're talking about her
book A Drive to Survive the Free Energy Principle
and the Meaning of Life. So, Doctor Nave, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone. Thank you for having me. It's pleased to
be here.
So, uh, we're going to talk a lot about
the free energy principle, but just before we get
into that specific framework, in the book, you go
through other sort of related approaches slash framework. So
could you start, uh, could you start by telling
us a little bit about an activism? What is
an activism?
Sure, um, so an activism, I think the way
it's sort of typically demarcated. I as an approach
that kind of stems out of a book, The
Embodied Mind that was written in 1991 um by
Francisco Varela and Thompson, um Evan Thompson, Eleanor Roche,
um. And the main kind of theme that comes
out of that book is the idea that when
we're trying to understand cognition, we shouldn't be presuming
that the sort of purpose of cognition is something
like the voridical reconstruction of a mind independent world.
Which is how cognition is quite sort of I
guess it's often called almost like the sort of
traditional cognitivist view. Um, AND it's the kind of
view, it goes along with traditional views and philosophy
around like truth and knowledge in terms of correspondence.
And so the idea of the embodied mind is
that cognition is more about a kind of process
of coping with the world, so it's about a
process of skillful sensory motor coordination. Um, AND that's
a view that also has, it's quite continuous with
a lot of work in what's known as phenomenology,
um, particularly the philosopher Mario Ponti. The I think
one very distinct feature of that as well, um,
is the idea of cognition as a sort of
biological phenomenon. Um, YOU know, it's something that develops
in living systems. And given that it's something that
develops in living systems, that should maybe change how
we think about it, as opposed to if we
think about cognition as, you know, something, some sort
of algorithmic manipulations that a machine or a computer
is doing. Um, AND I guess one other thing
to say about an activism is, I think there's
a very broad use of it, where it's just
something like, um, cognition is about the control of
action. Um, IT'S not first and foremost about representation.
It's often seen as a view that's defined by
its anti-representationalism. Um, SO it's defined by the idea
that cognition is not involving of representations. I personally
don't think that's a good way to sort of
demarcate it. I think it's defined. In terms of
not beginning with that representational standpoint. But that doesn't
necessarily mean that, you know, in the control of
action, we wouldn't come to develop some sort of
representational structures. So there's a very broad notion of
inactivism, cognition begins as the control of action, and
then there are more sort of specific notions of
it that focus more on, for example, things like
biological processes, um, the concept of autopoiesis, which we'll
probably get to. Um, AND that makes a lot
more specific claims about what action needs to be
and how it, how it needs to be embodied.
I guess if you think of inaction as focusing
on the body, you might have lots of different
the body and how the body acts. That still
is quite open to a variety of different views
about what it takes to have a body. Could
a robot have a body, or does a body
have to be alive, for example, and different kind
of approaches within that kind of broader framework of
inactivism would take different positions on those questions.
Right. So, at a certain point there, you mentioned
the phenomenological tradition in philosophy. Could you tell us
a little bit more about how do you look
at the relationship between inactivism and phenomenology? I mean,
is an activism sort of a naturalistic continuation of
the phenomenological tradition or what?
I think that that's how I like to think
about it. I mean, people will argue a lot
on what the correct way to think about it
is, but to me it is very continuous. Um,
IT'S both historically, um, the embodied mind was very
directly inspired by Merlo Ponty. Um, SO there's a
sort of a direct link there. But also there
is a very deep similarity in kind of, in
almost in kind of the underlying metaphysics, I think,
which is important. In that a lot of these
debates around what cognition is are often I sometimes
approach this kind of more empirical questions like we
have to look, we have to, you know, look
into the brain, see what's going on, and then
we can figure out cognition. And I think what's
sometimes missed is that a lot of an active
work is inspired by a sort of deeper question,
which is not just what's the best framework for
describing the brain, but what is the best way
to think about these kind of foundational philosophical concepts
like truth and knowledge, um. And there's a kind
of like very crude way you could divide up
the way that those ideas are thought about in
the broader kind of philosophical tradition where the kind
of the kind of philosophy in school because I
was in a very analytic program is very kind
of focused on things like correspondence, um, You know,
there's an objective world out there, how can we
justify knowledge of it and then you have this
sort of gap between the objective world and what's
in your mind, how do you overcome that skepticism.
And one of the most important ideas of phenomenology
for me is this idea that you can have
a notion of objectivity and truth, and like, correctness
and incorrectness. So it's not just like a purely
subject it's not a purely subjective view of what
we can know. It's often phenomenology is often, I
think, placed in the camp of introspectionism. So I
guess the thing to say is. The sort of
basic method that one might think of as involved
in phenomenology is that you take your experience of
the world and you like really look at that
experience and try and figure out what are the
properties of that experience. Sometimes that sounds very subjectivist,
you know, you're just like staring at a glass
of wine and trying to think, what is it
really like to look at this wine? Um, BUT
that's like a horrible caricature. Um, IT'S a much
more kind of rigorous method where it's, It's more
like if my experience has these structures, so for
example, it's spatial, um, you know, there is a
sense of things being objects that I can interact
with, um, it's temporal. There are these kind of.
Necessary underlying structures in my experience and what phenomenology
is trying to do often is to get at
that structural aspect of experience. And to get at
what features experience has to have to be experience
at all. And that tends to be sort of
grounded in rather than features of the objective world,
features of what we as a kind of as
experiences as experiences, as people who experience, as a
group. Um, WHAT are the sort of It's more
like a sort of intersubjective notion of objectivity, that
to be part of this group of people who
experience the world, we have to have certain structures
in our experience, and that gives experience that kind
of objectivity that's very different from an objectivity that's
grounded in what's independent from us. Um, SO it's
not like purely individual, but it's not about an
independent world. It's more about a group of people
and what kind of features must their experience have
to be an experience of a world at all.
And just how that ties into an activism is,
I think it gives you a notion of trying
to think about what are, what is the goal
and what is the purpose of cognition? What are
we trying to do that isn't about matching an
external world, but more about coordinating our actions with
respect to each other. Um, AND that, I do
think is kind of like quite a fundamental. Sort
of metaphysical feature of a lot of inactive work,
um, that is quite different from sort of the
traditional sort of objective realist metaphysics, you might get
in a lot of other areas of sort of
scientific and naturalistic approaches to the mind. I don't
know if that was maybe too like wide ranging
in the explanation. Uh,
YEAH, we also have some other concepts in this
sort of theoretical introduction we're doing here to the
topic and uh also some other frameworks, some of
which you've already mentioned there that we're going to
talk about as well. But, uh, I would like
to ask you now, what are intentions and what
does it mean for living systems to have goals?
Sure, yeah, so I think. There's two ways the
notion of intention intentionality might be used in philosophy
in a in a non sort of phenomenological way,
which would be in a sort of analytic philosophy
of mind. Intentionality isn't about goals, or it's often
explicitly stated that it's not about goals. It's the
property of the mind being directed towards correspondence with
some sort of external object. So it's the property
that a representation has. It has intentional content, and
that content is the state of affairs that the
representation is sort of somehow supposed to match up
with, um. So that's how it often gets used
in philosophy of mind. It's less about, you know,
I want to pick up this glass of water
and my intention is to do so, but more
I have a state in my head that bears
an intentional or representational relationship to that glass of
water, which is often a bit confusing I think.
Um, AND then obviously there's the notion of intention
that is more the kind of common notion that
you and I would use when you talk about,
you know, did you have the kind of intention
that's important, for example, in a court, when you're
like, did they have intention to commit that act?
Um, DID they have like a conscious sort of
desire to do so, did they consider it beforehand?
And it's very rationalistic and linguistic. So we tend
to be thinking about, did somebody sort of sit
there and deliberate and make a decision. Before they
acted, and that's the question of whether or not
it's intentional. Um, BUT I think there's this sort
of third notion of intention, which is what I'm
interested in, which is less kind of rationalistic and
less deliberative than the notion that's involved when we
think about human intentional action and deliberation. And that's
more the set, but it is still about action,
and that's the way in which when we think
of living systems in general, we can think of
their actions as directed towards the achievement of something
that they might fail to bring it about. Um,
SO you know, a bacteria can swim up a
sugar gradient, and in a sense, the, the behavior
of that bacterium is sort of, it's directed towards
achieving a particular state, toward achieving a particular sort
of nutrient flow. That's quite different from how a
machine works, because in the case of a machine,
once we've described every single sort of feature of
that machine and the laws that govern it, we've
said all that there is to say. There's no
more to say about, but should it have done
that? Was it supposed to do that? Has it
failed or succeeded in doing that? And I think
that's an interesting. An interesting sort of. Middle ground,
an interesting distinction between a living system and a
machine that's not quite the sort of full-fledged human
notion of intention. And it's making sense of that
basic sense of success and failure, striving, aiming notion
of intention that I think is quite important for
them as like a sort of basis before we
can get to the human notion of intention.
Mm. Right. So, uh, earlier when we were talking
about inactivism, you mentioned very briefly autopoiesis. So, what
is it and how does it come into the
picture here?
Sure. So autopoiesis, that was developed by Francisco Varela
with Humberto Matuana, two Chilean biologist. Um, AND initially,
the, the kind of core of Apois is the
cell. And what autopoiesis is supposed to describe is
it it means self-production. How the cell produces itself.
Um, AND that kind of involves in a very,
it typically begins with like a very, very crude
model of a cell. It's just like a membrane
surrounding a network of reactions. And the idea is
that that network of reactions, that metabolic network, depends
on the membrane to work, because if there's no
membrane. Surrounding that network of reactants, they'll just disperse,
and they won't have the necessary concentrations for the
necessary reactions to take place. But the membrane in
turn depends upon the internal internal network of reactions,
because that membrane is itself sort of precarious and
needing to be constantly rebuilt by the synthetic activity
of the internal sort of chemical reactant network. So
there's this mutual dependence between the membrane surrounding the
reactions and the reaction network itself. That gives you
some sort of notion of self-production. Um, SO the
basic the idea about hypoesis was initially very focused
on the cell and on those kind of molecular
processes specifically. And then I think one of the
big kind of questions in how people think about
that more recently is there's a tendency to try
and generalize. There's a, well, there's a desire, right,
to generalize beyond the cell. The cell is a
nice sort of, um, canonical example. I like to
think of the, you know, what the Turing machine,
the idea of a Turing machine is to classical
cognitive science. The cell is to an active cognitive
science. It's the kind of minimal unit of cognit
the kind of basic structure of cognition is supposed
to be exemplified in it. Um. But then, you
know, if we want to think about multicellular creatures
as cognizing, do we talk about them as being
out of poetic in some way as well? Given
that, you know, my self is not purely at
the level of a single cell and single set
of molecular reactions, as these sensory motor coordination leaps
as well. The kind of question is how do
we take. That notion of what is essentially cellular
metabolism and generalize it to these like higher level
processes.
Uh, SO related to that, I, I mean, I
think it's related to that, but what about autonomy?
What is autonomy and the other is related to
it in any way?
Yeah, um, so I think autonomy is interesting in
that. The kind of root, the philosophical roots of
autonomy, often like K's kind of your key guy
for the for the idea of autonomy. Um, AND
it's like a self-given law. It's a law that
you give to yourself. Um, AND this key idea
there is freedom is not about not being restricted.
It's not about not being constrained at all. It's
not that kind of purely voluntarist concept conception of
freedom where you could do anything. That's a meaningless
notion of freedom. ANYWAY. Um, BUT it's also, you
know, if you're pure, purely determined by the external
laws of the universe to follow some particular trajectory
without any kind of influence on that, then that
can't really be freedom either. And the idea of
autonomy is supposed to capture this notion that as
a system, you can constrain your own behaviors in
ways that make those behaviors meaningful because they are
expressions of constraints you yourself have chosen. So they're
not, you know, purely random, but they are still
sort of self-determined. It's the giving a law to
yourself. Um, THAT'S the kind of sort of traditional
philosophical notion of it. And then the way it
relates to autopoiesis is, is as I said, one
of the issues with autopoiesis is how do we
generalize that beyond the single cell. And one popular
way of thinking about it is rather than trying
to modify that very molecular notion of self-production, you
say, OK, Aldiquesis is the molecular notion of self-production.
But that is a minimal form of autonomy, where
autonomy is the more general property. And then the
question is, how do you make sense of that
more general property? Um, AND one of them might
be something like, because the cell has that kind
of internal mutual dependence of its parts, that determines
what that cell can and can't do and continue
to exist. Because the cell, the the internal network,
the internal metabolic network can't exist without the membrane,
that means that that cell needs to, for example,
take in certain nutrients in order to refuel those
reactants, to rebuild its membrane. It needs to not,
you know, go into certain chemicals or go into
certain temperatures. It's sort of precarious mutual dependence of
processes that make up a cell, constrain what that
cell can and can't do. um. And the idea
that that's, that is some sort of minimal notion
of autonomy insofar as there's nothing about the laws
of the universe that state a cell has to
exist. You know, that's not a general feature of
fundamental physics that cells must emerge. But once they
emerge, and once you have these kind of structures,
they create their own further constraints on what they
can and can't do, um, that are intrinsic to
that sort of system. And there's lots of different,
more specific ways that people have formulated that notion
of biological autonomy because there's lots of problems with
each of them. But I think the general idea
is to capture that notion of the system has
a kind of Precarious structure that determines that that
system then has particular needs that it has to
fulfill, but it only has those needs because of
the system that it is, not because of any
sort of general features of the universe. So it's
determining its own needs. Um, AND that sort of,
I think, maybe see how that relates to the
sort of more Kantian notion of autonomy as a
self-given law.
Yeah. Uh, SO in the book, you also talk
about the concept of adaptivity. What does it refer
to?
Yeah, so when I said the idea that autopois
is supposed to be this sort of minimal kernel
of a cognitive system. The big problem with that
is something like that kind of metabolic self production.
Doesn't really come by degrees. You can't be better
or worse at it. You can't be flexible in
it. It's just you have to maintain the right
balance of energy flows, and either you succeed or
you fail. So it's a very either or sort
of normativity. You're either living or you're dead. Um,
AND that's not very useful for thinking about action
coordination, where we're trying to progressively improve our conditions.
We're trying to. You know, control, there's more of
a regulatory aspect where things can be better or
worse, and we're trying to adjust them to make
them better or worse. You know, we're not just
living or dying, we are coping with our environment
and changing the way in which we're living in
that changing the way in which we're living to
make our to sort of improve our conditions of
viability. And so adaptivity, which was introduced by, obviously
adaptivity is a more general notion, but in the
inactive sort of literature specifically. Um, THAT was introduced
in a paper by Ezekiel de Paolo in 2005.
And I think the whole point of that paper
is people had said for a while that like
autopoiesis is not sufficient for something that we would
think of as a cognitive system. You can create
quite trivial, minimally out of poetic systems that don't
have any kind of interactions where they modify their
environments, and that activity is supposed to capture that
there's also this additional element. It's not just that
you're a sort of um. A cycle of processes
that keep supporting each other. You're also a cycle
of external processes that involve adjusting your environment to
support that internal network. Um, YEAH.
So, just one more thing before we get into
the free energy principle. You also talk about predictive
processing. So, what is predictive processing about and what
can we derive from it for the sort of
framework you present in your book?
Sure, yeah, so I think there's. A few different
kind of, I think what predictive processing is like
the framework that it's sort of currently known as
does is sort of synthesize a variety of different
ideas that people have had about what the brain
needs to do to cope with the world. Um,
ONE of them is compression. So that's the idea
that, you know, firstly there are bottlenecks in the
nervous system and we need to only transmit the
sort of relevant information. And there's the idea of
predictive coding, so that whenever you are trying to
send a message, you don't need to send all
of the information. So you know, if you're trying
to send a picture, you don't need to send
the color value of every single pixel. You just
say, you know, this pixel is black, and then
just keep that going until there's an error, and
that error signal tells you to change the color
of the pixel. So you can, it's a way
of compressing the amount of information you're sending. You
just send when there's a change, not every single
value of every pixel individually, you know, you don't
send the same message over and over again. Um,
SO that's an interesting and useful idea that that
might be, um, relevant to your neural functioning. Predictive
processing is also, I think most significantly linked to
the idea of perception as inference. So the idea
that um, You know, the information that we get
about the world is very, very limited in some
sense, in some people will argue about that as
well. Um, BUT if you think about, you know,
the light that comes in through your retina, that
massively under determines the kind of objects that you
can be around you. And like, I think the
most obvious example of that is when you look
around you, you see three dimensional objects. You see
them, you know, if you can't see all the
legs of a table in front of you, you
can only see sort of the top and one
leg. But you sort of perceive that table as
having, you know, legs and other parts that are
hidden to you. You don't see it as a
sort of facade, like a flat 2D facade. You
see it as an object that has hidden elements
that if, you know, if you moved around, you
could see them. So there's that kind of reconstructive
element in our perceptual experience. Um, uh, THE idea
is kind of. So again, again, it all comes
back to can, but the kind of the cantier
the cognition is at least involves an element of
us as perceivers sort of synthesizing this, um, indeterminate
input and creating a sort of space the spatiality
of our experience of the world involves a contribution
from our minds, essentially, um. And then the Herman
von Helmholtz, and I never know what to describe
him as because he was kind of a polymath,
but let's just say he was a polymath. He
did all things. Um, HE sort of attempted to
kind of operationalize that Cantuan idea that humans bring
a contribution to cognition. They don't just passively receive
the world. And he formulated that in terms of
an inferential process, not actually, I think a Bayesian
inferential process, more a sort of associationist inferential process.
Um, BUT still the idea there was that we
are following certain laws of kind of probabilistic inference
to. You know, infer from indeterminate sensory evidence what
the world is actually like, and that what we
actually experience is not the indeterminate, you know, the
sort of photons hitting our retina, but a kind
of cognitive reconstruction of what is the best explanation
based on all of our previous knowledge. That would
explain that sensory data. So you sort of learn
to see is the idea, you know, seeing is
not something you just happens to you, it's something
that you learn how to do over time by
interacting with the world and seeing how your sensory
information. Changes through that interaction. Um, AND yeah, the
idea is that can be formalized in terms of
Bayesian inference. Um, THAT'S kind of what the free
energy principle and active inference tries to do. Um,
AND predictive processing gives you kind of one story
about a sort of architecture for Bayesian inference under
certain constraints. So if you think of that inferential
process, it's a really, really complicated mathematical. Sort of
calculation that you would have to do to actually
infer all of the different possible hidden causes of
your sensory stimulation, it would be impossible. So we
try and approximate that, and one way we could
approximate that is through this kind of attempt to
just continually predict and update. Um, AND I guess
one final thing to say is a key aspect
of that in predictive processing is the idea that
that's a hierarchical process. So it's not just I
make a prediction at the level of sense data,
at the level of, um, not sense data, at
the level of sensory input. You know, not just
predicting what's going on at my retina. In fact,
I'm never consciously doing that. But that we're predicting,
we're attempting to make predictions over multiple different timescales
and different sort of spatial grains. So I might
be predicting. You know, I'm more likely to predicting
that there's, um, you know, a table leg beneath
the table, and that's a very indeterminate and vague
prediction, and it's a much sort of higher level
coarse grained prediction that I don't update unless a
really massive change happens at the lower levels. Um,
SO you sort of reconstruct the causal structure, you
attempt to reconstruct the causal structure of the world.
At lots of different levels of sort of spatiotemporal
grain. And that's how we get these sort of
large size objects in our perceptual experience.
Right. So let's get then into the free energy
principle. Uh, I mean, of course, there would be
tons of things to talk about here, but could
you give us perhaps a summary of it or
at least of the particular aspects that are the
most relevant for the kinds of topics you explore
in the book?
Sure, yeah, um. Again, I think with the principle,
there's, there's kind of two ways into it. One
is the way I've just described predictive processing, which
is, um, We have this sort of under determination
problem where the evidence that we have is insufficient
to let us know about the structure of the
world. And so we want to do some sort
of inferential process to figure out what are the
causes of our, um, of our inputs. Bayesian inference
is like the classic sort of gold standard for
how we would do that. Bayesian inference is too
hard with all of the different options. We use
this approximation technique and I guess, sorry, I'm actually
talking more about active inference here. I've just realized.
OK, no, no problem. We can go back
to the beginning. Um, I think it helps to
talk about active inference first though, maybe because in
that context, all active in all the kind of
idea of free energy minimization in that context is,
um, doing. Is it something that With a kind
of with quite a lot of assumptions can be
an approximation of the true prediction error relative to
a Bayesian process. So in a properly Bayesian process,
you're trying to make your input as likely as
possible. You're, but not just your current input, you're
trying to find the sort of probabilistic model. That
would make your history of sensory experiences as likely
as possible. So, you know, if you see a
white object, you don't just go, everything is white,
because that's the best way to minimize my prediction
error, because you've had lots of experiences of non-white
objects. So you try and minimize average survival surprisal
and say you've seen 50% white objects, 50% black
ones, you, the best way to minimize your surprisal
is to go 50% black, 50% white. Um, BUT
as I said, that's really hard, um, and free
energy is. Under under certain assumptions, which there are
quite a lot of assumptions, it's a good proxy
for surprisal. So instead of minimizing the surprisal of
your evidence stream, you minimize this free energy, which
is just that, that unlikeliness relative to a much
simpler probability distribution. So basically, you can strain the
probabilistic models that you work with, and you don't
deal with every single possible probability distribution. You just
deal with a very simple sort of set, um,
and normally it'll be something like a Gaussian distribution
or a normal distribution. Um, AND you vary that
very limited model and try and change that to
make your evidence as likely as possible. So you're
doing sort of the same thing that you would
do in Bayesian inference, just with a much simpler
model. And the difference between that simple, how much
that simple model allows you to minimize surprise, um,
and how much a Bayesian model would is kind
of the, The approximation part of the free energy
term. Um, SO that's kind of what free energy
is in that context. Right. And then, and so
there it's very much tied to this problem of
inference, I guess it's the main point. It's very
much tied to this view that we are trying
to reconstruct the actual structure of the world. Now,
as I said, like, that's not how inactivists tend
to think about the problem of cognition. They tend
to think about it as a process of controlling
action, um, you know, keep biological regulation. And I
think the free energy principle is the principle. Has
become much more associated with that way of thinking
about cognition. So it's less about the kind of
predictivist, reconstructivist view. Under that view, what free energy
is doing is quite different. It's mathematically it's the
same, um, but how you interpret what's going on
is it's less I'm trying to minimize prediction error
or surprise or. In order to reconstruct the world.
What I'm actually trying to do is control myself.
Um, I'm trying to be homeostatic. I'm trying to
regulate my internal temperature and all of those kind
of um essential variables that need to have a
certain value to keep me alive. And in the
same way as if you're trying to make predictions
around the world about the world, you're trying to
minimize surprisal. Just in the same way, if you're
trying to control your internal state, you're also trying
to minimize how unlikely um deviation, how you're trying
to minimize deviations from a predicted state. And in
this kind of more inactive way of thinking. So
in the traditional way of thinking, you have an
error, and the way to get rid of that
error is to update your model because there's something
out there that's correct and you want to match
it. So you change what's going on in here
to minimize that error. In the more kind of
control or inactive or cybernetic, um, way of thinking,
whenever there's an error. And if it's about control,
the error, the problem is not your internal state.
The problem is, the problem is not your predicted
internal state. The problem is that the world isn't
matching your prediction. So rather than update your model,
you try and act upon the world to make
it match your prediction. So if I've always expected
to have a body temperature of 37.5 degrees and
I get too hot, it doesn't make sense for
me to go, Oh, now my body temperature is
40 degrees because eventually you'll just die. It makes
sense for you to try and cool yourself down.
But what's interesting is, even though you're conceiving the
problem differently, you're thinking about it in terms of
control rather than reconstruction. What you're actually doing is
minimizing the same thing. You're minimizing unlikeliness relative to
your model. You're just doing it by changing the
causes of your sensory input rather than by changing
your model. And so the free energy principle kind
of says we can think about life as regulation.
Every living system is a system that is homeostatic,
that has to control or allostatic, that has to
regulate its internal states to stay alive. And if
it's true. Which I don't think it is, which
we'll get to. Um, BUT I, if I, if
that is true, if the basic principle of living
systems is regulation and control, then insofar as minimizing
of errors and surprises allows you to describe that,
then it allows you to describe everything a living
system has to do. And that's kind of the
claim of the free energy principle.
Right, right, but, but there are a few concepts
here that I think it's better for us to
go through for people to understand a little bit
better. WHAT the free energy principle is about and
how it works. So what is a generative model
then?
So yeah, so. The sort of the most, I
guess, um, like normal way of thinking about the
generative model is that it's a joint probability distribution.
Um, SO if you're in, if your problem is
that kind of inferential reconstructive problem, then what you
have are your sensory inputs, and then you have
your hidden causes that you want to know about.
And the generative model is a model of the
joint likelihood of all of those different possible. Inputs
and hidden causes. And once you have that kind
of model, and if you are thinking of this
in these very reconstructivist terms, that's a model that
you literally encode somewhere in your brain. And that's
what allows you to make predictions. That's what allows
you to do the Bayesian inferential process and go,
given this particular observation, this particular hidden external cause
is the most likely one. So that's, I think,
the Sort of traditional way of thinking about a
generative model. That's the way you think about it
in sort of machine learning. It's just a way
of allowing you, it's just something, it's a sort
of, it's a structure that you need, um, to
infer, to do full Bayesian inference and infer things
about the world. Um. The way it's used in
the kind of more inactive version of the free
energy principle and active inference. I it's sometimes argued
that rather than this generative model being something that
the individual cognizer is encoding and using to infer
things about the world, instead it's just a description
of what the statistical structure of the sort of
the organism and its environment is, um. And it's
some it's what the organism is trying to approximate
through its interactions with the world. It's trying to
preserve a stable set of statistical behaviors, such as,
you know, stable mean temperature. And a stable sort
of relationship between itself and the environment that could
then be described by that statistical model. So we
don't necessarily have to say that the organism is
encoding it and performing inference with it. It's more
a way of describing the process of regulatory control
that that organism is engaged in, because if you
are controlling your interactions with the environment, then there
will be various states that will be stable with
some variation. And as long as you have those
kind of stable states, then they could be described
by this kind of probabilistic model.
Right. And what is a mark of blanket? And
I mean, what aspects of it are important for
people to understand in the context of your book?
Sure. So, Mark Markov blankets originally came from work
on like causal inference. Um, AND there the main
idea is if you're trying to make inferences about
causal s well, yeah, 11 of the main ideas
there is if you're trying to make inferences about
the causal structure of the environment from purely statistical
information. Obviously, like purely purely correlational information is never
enough to determine. One set of causes, but sometimes
if you look at statistical relationships and statistical, what
are called conditional independencies, that allows you to figure
out some constraints on what the possible set of
causes could be. And like the classic example for
that would be, you know, if you look at
your, like a barometer that measures like, I don't
know, what is a barometer, air pressure on the
wall. And every time you look at your barometer,
there's lightning, and you can go, oh, you know,
the state of my barometer is correlated with the
probability of lightning, and my barometer always shows air
pressure increasing before lightning happens. So you might think,
oh, my barometer is causing the lightning. Um, AND
that obviously is wrong, but if you have a
third, it's hard to say, but if you have
a sort of additional variable like air pressure. And
once you know that the air pressure is a
certain um value, then the state of your barometer
doesn't provide any more information about the likelihood of
lightning. Um, SO that sort of third variable makes
the lightning conditionally independent of the state of your
barometer. And that allows you to say the only
reason my barometer is connected to lightning is because
it's also connected to this 3rd variable of air
pressure. And that renders the barometer and the lightning
conditionally independent. So the idea there is just that
it's a measure or it it might be a
way of. Formulating a sort of a coherent guess
at what the causal structure of your environment is,
and it might allow you to say that two
features of your environment are conditionally independent based on
this third thing. But it is purely statistical, so
it doesn't actually determine that. It's just a way
of formulating. A model of what these causal independencies
might be. Um, THEN the way that's used in
the foreny literature is, so I only talked about
a single third variable. Um, BUT if you look
at a whole network of statistical relations, then you
get a number of different potential variables that render
one variable independent of all of the others. And
all of those make up the Markov blanket. So
they're all of the things that once you know
those things. Nothing else in your environment contains any
more information about the state of the thing that
you're interested in? The way that's then used in
the free energy principle is because that. Because that
sounds like a sort of boundary. It sounds like
it's something that renders one particular aspect of your
environment independent of everything else. The idea there is
that that might correspond to something like, for example,
the cell membrane in autopoiesis. It might correspond to
the parts of the world that bound the system
that you're interested in. Um, AND insofar as you
can only describe that kind of statistical boundary, if
the system that you're interested in has stable, you
know, the, the system needs to have statistical properties,
and not every system does. Um, YOU know, like
a, well, not every system has like a stable
mean behavior, because if you think of sort of,
you know, the process of decay, there's no average
state of a decaying system. Um, SO you can't
describe a stable mean and, you know, standard sort
of deviations from that mean. So you need a
sort of a system needs to have a sort
of stability in order to be described in statistical
terms. And like the most simple example is something
like a homeostatic system, a system that's varying around
a particular state. Because those stable statistics are necessary
for you to describe the Markov blanket of a
system, it sounds like you can sort of say,
because the system is homeostatic, so it has stable
statistics, therefore it has a Markov blanket, and because
its own behavior is creating the statistics that allow
me to describe a Markov blanket, it sounds like
you can say the system itself is producing that
Markov blanket. So it's almost like the system is
creating its boundary. In the same way that a
cell creates its cell membrane. Um, I, I have
a lot of problems with that way of talking.
I don't think that's a good way of, of
capturing the notion of something creating its own boundary,
but that's kind of the idea of it and
the role that it has played in the Frei
principle.
So what is a living agent then?
OK, um. I think You know, there's gonna be
so many different answers to that question, um. I
mean, one thing that has traditionally been focused on,
obviously in philosophy of biology has always been, um,
reproduction, um, you know, like living systems are ones
that can produce offspring, um, that they have this
ability to vet. They they're subject to Darwinian evolution.
Um, AND that that's the key feature of living
systems, which isn't a very good definition, right, because
it's good in general. In general, living systems do
reproduce and have offspring, but some living systems don't
really have a distinction between, you know, the parent
and the offspring. They just mutate, they just sort
of. Um, DEVELOP in ways like clonal organisms, for
instance, where they just continue to grow over time
and there's no clear way of cutting parent and,
um, offspring also, you know, a lot of individual
people just don't reproduce, and that doesn't mean they're
not living systems. So it's not a great way
of, um, I think the way of thinking about
living systems that I find most compelling. Is the
idea that living systems have a very particular relation
to energy and to their environment, that nonliving ones
don't. And so living systems are systems that depend
on the input of energy and matter to rebuild
themselves to continue existing. And that is not a
property of most ordinary objects, you know, like a
table doesn't need anything to stick around. It's got
a kind of intrinsic stability. Living systems are systems
that don't have that, that. Are always dependent on
energy gradient on energy flow to rebuild, so they're
dissipative systems is the way it's described normally. That's
not sufficient to be a living system because a
tornado is the same, you know, a tornado needs
that kind of um temperature gradient, pressure gradient in
order to continue to exist, same with a candle
flame. So it's not that that property of being
a dissipative system is sufficient for a living system,
but it's a very important necessary element that distinguishes
organisms from other systems. And then things you might
add to that are the ability to regulate that
relationship. So that kind of adaptivity that we talked
about before. So you have that need for a
kind of energy flow and matter flow to continue
rebuilding yourself, but what makes living systems distinct is
that they can act on their environment to change
the way that they relate to it in order
to improve. It's their sort of position in the
environment to secure that ongoing, um, flow of energy
that they need to rebuild themselves. And if you
think of something like a candle flame, a candle
flame doesn't do that. A candle flame burns through
its energy source and then goes out. It doesn't
like move around and find new energy sources, um.
Oh, that's not, I would say like a sufficiently
robust definition of a living agent, but I think
those are the kind of key elements. They go
into it and.
Uh, SO we're close to talking directly about the,
the core issue of your book or the core
theme of your book, the drive to survive. But
just before that, let's perhaps, uh, also deal with
some other specific phenomena here. What is purposiveness?
Yeah, when you asked me about intentionality before, when
I talked about that sort of third notion of
it that I'm most interested in, that's not a
representational relationship, but also isn't. A human being linguistically
deliberating on their goals, it's this sort of 3rd
thing, the secret third thing, which is the. The
tendant, the striving or the sort of moving towards
something that you can fail to achieve. Yeah. I,
I would think of that as pretty much synonymous
with purposesiveness, or at least intrinsic purposesiveness. So to
be intrinsically purposive is to be the kind of
system that there's a sort of fact of the
matter about whether you succeeded or failed. I mean,
you can also have intrinsic purposes, so most artifacts,
like a laptop has a purpose, but that purpose
is not really a feature of the laptop in
itself. If there was no one else around, that
laptop doesn't have any purpose at all. The only
reason it has a purpose is somebody designed it
to do something and I use it to do
that thing. And in other situations, like there's these
things where people, you know, people make furniture out
of computer components. So you see like benches made
out of old MacBooks. Um, AND in that case,
the purpose of that object has changed because the
way that people are using it has changed. So
it doesn't have features internal to that system in
itself that say it has to have this or
that purpose. Whereas living systems, um, they don't have.
I think what's special about them. Is it's not
sort of up to you or me as an
observer what they have to do and what counts
as success or failure for them. I can't just
decide that what I want a bacterium to do
is to metabolize lactose, um, you know, it will,
it will be able to do that or it
won't, and it will either be. Um, IT will
either support its continued existence or not, a certain,
you know, nutrient. Whether, whether or not that is
consistent with that thing staying alive is dependent on
the internal properties of that system. Now, obviously, you
can genetically engineer these things to make them do
different things, but it's not just up to how
you choose to use them. There are kind of
constraints inherent in those systems in terms of what
they will and will not be able to survive,
that is quite different from mechanical systems. Mhm.
And what about goal directedness? What does that mean?
Yeah, I think I I use that in a
similar way um to the way in which I
think about purposesiveness and intentionality and one of, one
of the things that I'm thinking about more at
the moment is this, this kind of um. TENDENCY
towards a state that you can succeed or fail
at. I think that is very distinctive about living
systems, but it's not anything like. The kind of
um. I think that there's um. When I, so
I guess here's the thing, when I think about
goal directedness, I want to try and find this
sort of middle path between two different ways that
people have thought about it. So there's the way
that is more common in Um, I guess probably
in sort of, for example, meta ethics when people
think about human action, which is that having goals
involves explicit processes of reasoning, um, and sensitivity to
changes, the ability to change your goals, you know,
if you, you could make an argument to me
that I should change my goal and then I
might go after a different thing than I would
have otherwise. So like sensitivity to reasons, um. And
that's very, a very heavyweight notion of goal directedness
that is also quite difficult to give a really
satisfying, properly naturalistic explanation of, because it's grounded in
things like the meaning of language. And once you
try, you know, so if you're explaining goal directedness
in terms of the directedness of words, the way
in which words have meaning, you're kind of pushing
the problem into language. Um, AND then there's the
other notion of goal directedness, which is the way
in which I think it's more thought about in
the free energy principle. Which is a very cybernetic
notion of gold erectedness, where you can identify a
system as having gold if it's a system that
when it's disrupted from a state, regularly returns to
it. So any system that controls variations to reliably
return to a particular state is going to be
gold erected in this very, very minimal and very
trivial sense. Um, AND yeah, one problem with that
is that it's, it is very trivial. It involves
saying that, you know, a pendulum can have a
goal as much as anything else. Um, AND the
standard move there is to say that's fine. Um,
WE just use goal in this very minimal notion.
Um, BUT it only makes sense to talk in
terms of goal erectedness and purposesiveness when we have
these really complicated systems that we can't explain in
normal terms. So the reason we don't talk of
a pendulum as being goal directed. It is because
we can explain it entirely in terms of certain
laws of motion, coefficients of friction. And when you
have those sort of functions and um equations of
variables, you, that's all you need to predict the
behavior of the pendulum. The reason we talk about
goals and purposes on this account. For certain systems
is not because there's a fundamental difference between the
pendulum returning to stability and me eating breakfast every
day. It's just that because I'm so complicated, we
can't tell that nice little deterministic story that we
can tell for a pendulum. So we use the
languages of goal erectedness instead. And then the way
I've talked about intentionality and purposeiveness is supposed to
be something that's in between those two positions. So
it's not the full-fledged deliberative linguistic rational reflection on
intentions that we associate with like fully fledged human
cognition, but it's not this very minimal return to
stability that is a property of every physical system
either. Um, SO there are, I guess the kind
of three main positions, I think.
And from the perspective of the free energy principle,
what does biological survival mean then or in what
terms would you put it?
So I, I would say that for the free
energy principle, survival is tied to some form of
stability over time. Um, AND the examples I've given
are very basic ones, you know, they're just homeostatic
regulation. Um, THEY'RE just keeping a set of variables
in the state, in the same state over time.
That is a very simple example. There's no reason
that the stability that's required for survival has to
be. As, um, sort of low level, as just
the stability of a single variable. So you could
have something like the stability of a trajectory, um,
so a stable rate of growth. You could have
something like the stability of higher order relations, so.
It's not that I always have to be at
the same, you know, it's not that my in
the internal pressure of a cell has to always
be at the same state, but that it has
to be at the same state relative to the
external rest of its environment or. So you can,
you can describe quite complicated, very complicated behaviors in
terms of some form of stability. Um, YOU just
have to identify a description of what is invariant
throughout that behavior. um. And that's A very, it's
a very physicist way of thinking, I think, because
the kind of the thing that you do as
a physicist is you try and identify the sort
of mathematical invariants that are preserved through all of
the different ways the system behaves. Um, AND then
you capture those in a sort of nice equation
that, Can generate all of those weird varieties of
behavior that to a sort of simpler mind, look
as if they're massive transformations and completely unrelated. You
capture the sort of underlying um symmetries or invariants
that all of that kind of variability preserves. And
I think the goal of the the free energy
principle is to say that for all living systems
there will be something like that. There will be
some sort of kind of master equation that will
track that system over time that can be seen
to underlie. All of its behaviors. Um, AND I
think that's kind of that way of thinking. I
said it's very much a physicist's way of thinking.
It's the way you want to try and model
the world, um, if you have these mathematical tools.
I the way I like to think about that
is that's very much tied to what you might
think of as a substance ontology, which is the
idea that any system, sorry, any system that exists
and has some sort of essential invariant features that
allow you to identify over time. But that's not.
That's one possible ontology. You might have a process
ontology instead, and you might say, you know, what
allows something to exist over time isn't determined by
any invariant features. Um, BUT I think what gives
what gives the Frei principles claim a lot of
plausibility there. Is this idea of biological regulation that
might make you think that a sort of substant
substance ontology is good for living systems because they
are systems that contingently, it is true, do tend
to stay in the same states with regards to
some particular variables. Um, SO that gives plausibility to
the idea that that stability might be a sort
of principle of survival, I think.
And do you think that the free energy principle
properly accounts for the differences between living and non-living
systems?
So yeah, I, I definitely, I don't, but I
think, I think there's two reasons for that. I
think the most, perhaps the most obvious. So I
think the the way um the free energy principle.
So that there's loads of different people who've written
about it who have very different views and a
lot of people's opinions have changed over time. So,
um, but I think one kind of standard line
is it used to be claimed that this kind
of regulation and preservation of stability was, um, a
definitive of a key break between living and the
living systems that it was what distinguished life was
this homeostatic regulation. I think the very interesting thing
about the free energy principle is actually it's almost,
it sort of works as like a sort of
reductio where kind of revealing the absurdity of a
position, because when you define stability in the way
that the free energy principle does in purely formal
and statistical terms, if you make homeostasis a purely
statistical property of, you know. Having a high frequency
of being in a particular state that's stable and
doesn't change over time, then that is true of
basically every physical object in the world, um, that
we pick out, you know, every object. You know,
even like a sort of table will absorb heat
and dissipate heat, so it gets hotter and then
it dissipates that heat, and you can see that
as a regulatory process. You can see it as
it being disrupted and then returning to its stable
state. So if that was all there was to
being alive, um, there wouldn't be a fundamental difference
in kind between life and non-life. And I think
that is generally how people now have moved towards
interpreting the free energy principle. It's less a specific
principle of living systems, more this kind of theory
of everything. And the difference between life and non-life
would have to be cashed out in terms of
something like, you know, the complexity of those regulatory
processes. And it's, you know, it's just a it's
a more continuous scale and where we choose to
divide this is living, this is not living, is
more a matter of choice on that scale. Which
would also mean that the distinction between a very
complicated regulatory machine and an organism would be much
less significant, because they're both complicated regulators. um.
Uh, BUT in the book, at a certain point,
you talk about, I'm going to mention two aspects
here. I'm not sure if there are more, but
two aspects of the organismic manner of existence that
you think the free energy principle doesn't properly account
for. The first one is the potential for unpredictable
and ongoing developmental changes, and the second one, a
precarious dependence on continual material turnover. Could you explain
that?
Yeah, no, those are exactly the two key points.
Um, SO the first one is, the first one
comes back to when I was talking about the
idea that you can have a substance ontology or
you could have a process ontology, um. If you
think in terms of a substance ontology, the only
way in which it will be possible for us
to say anything exists over time is if we
can identify some invariant features that are preserved. And
importantly, I think you have to be able to
do that in advance. So it might be the
case that looking backwards, um. OK, so yeah, what
I'll say is um, it's. Sort of trivially true,
um, that for any process you should almost always,
once you know every sort of state that that
process has entered, you can retroactively look at that
and discover some sort of construct something that is
invariant throughout that process. And you can retroactively construct
invariant features of the process. For us to say
that a particular system. Actually necessarily has to preserve
some sort of set of stable features. That's a
stronger claim. We want to be able to say
that we can look at the system and know
in advance that whatever changes that system undergoes, if
it's to remain alive as the system that it
is, these things will have to stay fixed. Um,
AND we might think of, you know, your classic
essential variables, your sort of body temperature or your.
Um, SORT of balance of chemicals within a cell,
then it has to maintain this sort of level
of chemical balance, otherwise it will cease to exist.
I think what's so fascinating about living systems is
that. Seems to be, I think, impossible, um, because
of the fact that living systems. Even can can
change in ways that we don't state at the
beginning. Um, AND I think what's important here is
often when people are objecting to the free energy
principle in this regard, they point to human behaviors.
They point to the fact that we don't just
like, you know, stay in the town we grew
up in and go to the same places we
went to when we were 14 years old, right?
We like explore the world and we transform our
personalities in ways that are completely different from how
they used to be. But it's not what what
you might then say to that is if if
you're a defender of the free energy principle is
that that's because we're made up of lots of
little stable units and those little stable units are
all competing with each other, producing these kind of
phase transitions in behavior. It's a sort of emergent
phenomena in like these complex multicellular neural creatures like
ourselves. Um, SO I think the important example is
the fact that you have that kind of unpretstatable,
um, transition in stable states and even very, even
single-celled organisms. Um, THE example I always really like,
um, is when you think of individual bacterium, individual
bacteria, um, they have the ability to, that's so,
you know, very simple single-cell system that if it
was going to correspond to the free energy principle,
we should be able to determine in advance how
that system has to behave in order to stay
alive. We should be able to pick out some
essential, um, functions and variables. And one thing you
might think is if it's a glucose metabolizing bacterium,
it needs to maintain a stable level of glucose
intake. Um, BUT what a lot of bacteria can
do is they can pick up the units of
DNA from each other. Um, SO there's two ways
that can happen. You might have like two little
bacteria collide and they transmit DNA between them. Or
it might, you can also have viral retroviral insertions
of DNA, um, so there's tiny little viruses that
like DNA into other living organisms. Um, AND what's
really cool is like a lot of our DNA
is potentially from retroviral insertions as well. And so
it's like quite a pervasive process. And what that
can mean is you can have a particular bacterium
that has only ever metabolized a particular nutrient, a
particular chemical, and has up till this point. It's
been necessary, it's been necessarily true of that, that
in order to continue existing, it has to maintain
that level of chemical intake. It collides with this
little chunk of DNA and now it has the
ability to metabolize a whole, it can produce a
whole new set of enzymes which now allow it
to metabolize a whole new nutrient, so now it
can like metabolize lactose. And that transforms what that
bacterium can do, and it can now sort of
live in the mammalian gut when it might not
have been able to survive there before. So it
completely transforms that bacterium space of possibilities. But the,
the sort of factor that made that possible was
this little bit of this little plasmid little little
chunk of DNA from a different bacterium that was
wasn't a part of our original bacterium when we
were first observing it. So no amount of studying
that particular organism could have told us that it
would acquire this new ability because it wasn't latent,
it wasn't there was no sense in which it
was latent in the possibility space of that organism.
Um, AND I think that's to me quite a
really nice I think it's quite a powerful example
of the limits of trying to mathematically model an
organism in terms of sort of set of mathematical
mathematical invariants that we can say in advance, it
has to be preserved to exist. Um, AND it
pushes you more towards this kind of processual ontology,
where you have to think about a different clearly
we can identity, you know, as sort of naive
perceivers, we're able to look at that organism, and
even though its behaviors transformed radically, we can still
say it's the same organism just as, you know,
my parents still know I'm their daughter, even though
I'm very different from how I used to be.
And I think it's interesting to think how do
we do that then? How do we pick out
these organisms, these living systems over time through this,
um, radical change? And to me, that brings us
back to what autopoiesis was really about, which was
it's about this. THIS relation of dependence of productive
relationships, where what makes me the same person that
I was when I was much younger isn't any
invariant features that I'd preserved. It's the fact that
the person I am now is a direct product
of the behaviors and activity of that younger person.
So you can, you trace that dependence of productive
relationships over time. But to know that we're the
same, you actually have to be able to follow
that. You can't just take two distinct time slices
and not look at that in between part and
judge whether or not we're the same or not.
I mean, contingently you probably can, because I haven't
changed that much. But in the case of something
like a single-cell organism, you might not be able
to do that. The only way to know, you
know, it's whole genetic configuration might have changed, and
the only way to know it's the same organism
is through following it over time.
Mhm. But, but then what sort of implications does
the instability of living systems have for how we
understand them as autonomous agents and in what ways
does that connect to their goal of continued survival?
Yeah, I think so I think the thing I
maybe didn't talk about as much from your last
question relates to this as well, which is that
dependence on continual material turnover. Um, SO that, that
other feature, that in that instability comes from the
fact that, um, a living system is not at
a sort of rest state like a table. The
reason your sort of table stays solid is because
all of its atoms are in kind of like
an, an energy while they're in their lowest energy
configuration. And this is the kind of most stable
way for them to all be kind of organized
given the situation that they're in. And the, so
that doesn't mean, you know, you can't destroy a
table. An external force could come along and pull
the table apart over time, you know, really all
these sorts of wear and tear forces will eventually
grind it down. But the table in itself doesn't.
It doesn't churn through the stuff it's made up
of, and it doesn't need any inputs in order
to keep existing. That's very different from a living
system where all of the parts that make it
up are kind of degrading and turning over, you
know, like there are some organisms that can turn
over their entire cell membrane in just a few
minutes. So they, you know, they completely degrade the
membrane and replace it with entirely new parts in
over and over again on like a sort of
minute time scale. Um. And that, yeah, that's very
different from physical systems. That's not something the free
energy principle itself, for example, actually describes. Um, BUT
what that means, I think what's important about that
is that means that the way a living system
relates to its environment is not just as a
source of external disruptions and threats and things that
can destroy it. The environment is something that the
living system sort of has to reach out to,
um. It doesn't just respond, you know, it's not
like it sits there passively and then the environment
does something and it has to react. It has
to continually move out into its environment to get
the things that it needs. And the very sort
of, um, I think kind of crude way of
making that distinction is. If you have something like
a pendulum, you know, it will continually respond to
you disrupting it. But if you put it in
a vacuum and don't do anything to it, it'll
just sit there forever and it won't move. If
you put a living system in any case where
it's deprived of environmental disruption, it doesn't just sit
there, it will, you know, sort of run around
trying to seek things out. It will spontaneously move
because it will be seeking out the stuff that
it needs and. This, I think this kind of
distinction, it came up back when. I think this
difference between a feedback mechanism and a living system
is super important. And a philosopher Hans Jonas, who
kind of raised this exact point. When he was
talking about a very similar set of approaches to
the free energy principle. So in the sort of
um 40s and 50s and 60s, there was a
movement called the cybernetics movement, a movement like a
group of researchers, which was doing something very similar
to what the free energy principle is doing now,
trying to define um. Trying to define agency and
goal directiveness in terms of feedback control. um. And
so he was, Hans Jonas was kind of making
exactly the same point that I want to make
in response to the free energy principle. That unlike
a feedback control mechanism, living systems, you know, they
are, they have needs, they have to reach out
to the world to continue to exist. And that's
just a very different relationship that I think starts
to move you towards something where you are intrinsically
purpose, you're intrinsically goal directed because you have. That
internal need that is not something that uh something
that a person as an observer has come along
and ascribed to you and interpreted you in those
terms. That's a feature of your physical makeup that
you have to sort of reach out to the
world to get your nutrients in this way.
And so, uh, how do we proceed from here
then if the free energy principle in your view
does not fully account for the differences between living
and non-living systems, uh, what kind of framework of
approach would do that?
Yeah, um, the one thing that I do think,
um. In terms of how we proceed from here,
like, one thing that I definitely am not aiming
to say, and obviously like I spent a lot
of time criticizing the for energy principle, so it
comes across as though I'm saying useless, get rid
of it, which is not what I'm saying at
all. Um, I think particularly the sort of. Active
inference modeling type stuff is really useful and I
think it's. Useful to say that living systems contingently,
one of the ways in which they happen to
be able to survive involves regulation. That is a
part of life. And it's not a necessary principle.
It's not something that every living every living system
won't, there's no guarantee that because something has been
stable in the past, it will be stable in
the future. But in tenancy that's kind of like
our best guess. So we do tend to regulate
ourselves and free energy minimization and active influence as
a framework is quite a useful way of describing
that regulatory process. Um, SO the question more is
like all of the sort of stuff I've been
saying about these general distinctions about life and non-life,
if the Frei principle doesn't describe that sort of.
That's the thing that's kind of beneath the rei
principle, I think. Once you have that story, you
can put the Frei principle kind of on top
of it. Um, BUT what is the best way
to tell that story? Um, AND I think one
issue in an activism is the way that an
activism has often attempted to formulate that question has
been overly, overly kind of formal or abstract. Um,
SO when I spoke about this, this, you know,
you have the concept of outpois and we have
the concept of autonomy. And autopoiesis is very specific,
it's very molecular, it's cellular self-production. Autonomy is much
more general and is sometimes described as something like
a mutually independent network of processes. Um, And the
problem with that is you can create a mutually
independent network of processes quite trivially in lots of
non-living systems. Um, SO one example is you might
have a robot that um charges from solar energy.
Um, And in that kind of robot, its behavior
of seeking out the sun allows it to gain
the energy that it needs to continue moving around
and seek out more sunlight. So the sort of
the sunlight seeking behavior of that robot, um, is
dependent upon the solar generating process of that robot,
which is dependent on the solar seeking movements of
that robot in turn. So it looks there that
you have some sort of minimal. NOTION of um
mutually dependent processes. So I think that characterization of
autonomy is too general and invites. Things like the
free energy principle to say, look, we formulated that,
we've we formalized that. So what's needed is something
that is still more general and out of reus,
but more specific than just dependent network of processes,
um. And I think that gets like that's not
something that I necessarily think that it's easy to
give like a single line definition of what that
distinction is. Um, BUT the way of generalizing outpois
that I like, um. I in saying what's significant
about that metabolic network and its relation to the
cell membrane, is that we have two things going
on there. We have constraints and we have processes.
We have catalysts, um. And That notion of a
catalyst as being something that enables something to happen
without changing itself in that process, I think is
really pivotal and is missing in purely a purely
process dependent view. So the catalyst, you know, the
key thing about it is it remains invariant over
the process that it enables. But biological catalysts are
also on a different timescale, um, things that can
decay. So on the timescale of the reaction that
they enable, they're just these invariant features, but on
another time scale, they're decaying, sort of, you know,
they're precarious systems themselves that need to be rebuilt
by those processes, you know, your catalysts, your enzymes
in your cells, they run out, they need to
be rebuilt by the very processes that they enable
by constraining those processes. And once you have that
sort of two level relationship where it's not just
processes producing other processes, but things that constrain process
but things that act as invariant constraints on processes
on one time scale, but on a different time
scale of themselves kind of processual entities that need
to be rebuilt. Then you start to get a
sort of more hierarchical almost relationship where you have
different timescales at which things can either be. Enabling
something to happen or depending upon that to regenerate
themselves. And that's something that you, you don't necessarily
get that kind of hierarchical um structure of constraints
and processes in your more ordinary dissipative systems. Um,
YOUR things like tornadoes and um. You know, candles
signs and so on, um. And that's still, I
think it's virtually not enough. I think being a
living system takes more than that. It takes the
ability to regulate that process as well. But putting
something like that kind of constraint closure account, that
that that story of autocatalytic or autocatalysis. Um, WHERE
you have something like a separation of time scales
enable, I think that separation of time scales then
enables a new kind of opportunity for regulation of
how all of these, this network of constraints and
processes work together that is going to give you
something that looks more like a robust and less
trivial notion of what is distinctive about living systems.
The the nice thing about it is that something
like a constraint doesn't have to be um a
single enzyme or a single molecule. You can also
think of constraints at much higher levels as well,
like your body is a, you know, the structure
of your overall multicellular body is a constraint. So
I think the notion of constraint has that really
important kind of. Generality to it that allows us
to extend out of places beyond a single cell,
but constrained closure and the very, very precise sort
of energetic couplings that are involved is still very
specific in that, you know, an average non-biological physical
structure isn't going to have those kind of energetic
couplings.
So, yeah, so you've already mentioned constraint closure. Uh,
IS there anything else you'd like to wear that
I might have missed in with my questions or?
I don't think so. I think that was when
you sent over the questions, I was like, I
feel like that's pretty much everything I could want
to talk about. Um, I guess one thing, the
only other thing that I would say when I
was talking about liking this generality aspect of constraint.
IT'S interesting to think that that is helpful in
scaling up to multicellular systems, but a nice thing
about it as well is when we think about
how societies operate and how societies, um, How societies
might be thought of as like um superorganisms. The
idea of a constraint also applies nicely to the
scale of a society as well as to the
scale of an organism. Um, AND it might allow
you, if it allows you to talk about purposesiveness
and normativity in the case of an organism, it
might also allow you to analyze that concept and
the notion of what is the. What are the
intentions and purposes of the society? Is it achieving
those intentions and purposes allow you to sort of
say, compare societies and say how their social structures
and say how they are or are not supporting
the viability of those societies, which is really interesting,
um. And yeah, I think, I think that's that's
the sort of direction I'm interested in looking at
at the moment as well.
So I mean, we could scale this up and
apply it to understanding perhaps social phenomena and things
like human culture.
Yeah, I think, I mean, whether or not we're
able to be able to really understand it, I'm
not sure because I think that's, it's so complicated.
Um, BUT at least knowing that there's some set
of shared principles between a living system and a
social system, I think is really interesting. Um, IT'S
kind of like a quite a big Hegelian idea
that I'm quite interested in at the moment, that
the way we make sense of normativity and living
systems and societies is very importantly similar, um.
Great. So let's end on that note then and
the book is again a drive to survive the
free energy principle and the meaning of life. I'm
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview. And just before we go, would you
like to mention any places on the internet where,
where people can find you and your work?
So yeah, um, I don't have a website really.
I probably should. Um, I might get one set
up in time for this. Um, I'm on Twitter.
Um, THAT'S probably the best place to find, and
I'll post links to anything that I write that's
interesting there. Um, THAT'S probably like the main, the
main place you'll find me online. Um, YEAH.
Great. So, Doctor Nei, thank you so much for
coming on the show. This has been a very
fascinating fascinating conversation, so thank
you. Yeah, thanks so much for all the questions.
It's been great.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant Ju Jasent and the Samuel
Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran
David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.